
Learning basic Linux commands is essential for managing and navigating the
Linux filesystem,performing file operations, editing text files, 
and managing file permissions.This section covers commands for navigating
the filesystem, file manipulation, text editing, and managing permissions 
and ownership in both RedHat and Ubuntu Linux.

Navigating the Filesystem

    1.ls (List Directory Contents):
        The ls command lists files and directories in the current working directory.
        ex: ls
        To list hidden files (files starting with a dot .):
        ls -a
        To list detailed information (permissions, owner, size, etc.):
        ls -l
        Combine options (show hidden files in detailed format):
        ls -la

    2. cd (Change Directory):
    
        The cd command is used to navigate between directories.
        Example:

        To change to the /home directory:
        cd /home
        To go back to the previous directory:
        cd -
        To navigate up one level in the directory tree:
        cd ..

    3.pwd (Print Working Directory):

        The pwd command shows the current working directory.
        Example:

        pwd
        Output:

        /home/user

    4. find (Search for Files and Directories):

        find is used to search for files and directories based on criteria like name, size, modification time, etc.
        Example: To find files named "test.txt" in the /home directory:
            find /home -name "test.txt"
            locate (Find Files by Name):

    5.The locate command is a faster alternative to find, using a pre-built index to search files.
    Example:locate test.txt

File Operations

    1.cp (Copy Files and Directories):

    Copies files and directories from one location to another.
    Example:

    To copy a file:
    cp file1.txt /path/to/destination/
    To copy a directory and its contents:
    cp -r /source/directory /path/to/destination/
mv (Move or Rename Files):

Moves or renames files and directories.
Example:

To rename a file:
mv oldname.txt newname.txt
To move a file to another directory:
mv file1.txt /path/to/destination/

rm (Remove Files and Directories):

Deletes files and directories.
Example:

To remove a file:
rm file1.txt
To remove a directory and its contents:
rm -r /path/to/directory/
touch (Create Empty Files):

Creates an empty file or updates the timestamp of an existing file.
Example:

touch newfile.txt
mkdir (Make Directory):

Creates a new directory.
Example:

mkdir new_directory
To create a nested directory structure:
mkdir -p /path/to/new_directory/sub_directory
rmdir (Remove Empty Directory):

Deletes an empty directory.
Example:

rmdir empty_directory
cat (Concatenate and Display File Contents):

Displays the contents of a file.
Example:

cat file.txt
more and less (Paging Through File Contents):

more and less allow you to view large files one screen at a time.
Example:

more largefile.txt
less largefile.txt

Working with Text Files
nano (Simple Text Editor):

nano is a straightforward, user-friendly text editor for command-line environments.
Example:

To create or edit a file using nano:
nano newfile.txt
Inside nano, use Ctrl + O to save and Ctrl + X to exit.
vi or vim (Advanced Text Editor):

vi (or its enhanced version vim) is a powerful text editor with modes for editing and command execution.
Example:

To open a file using vi:
vi file.txt
In vi, press i to enter insert mode (for editing).
Press Esc to exit insert mode and return to command mode.
To save and exit:
:wq

head (View the First Few Lines of a File):

Displays the first 10 lines of a file by default.
Example:

head file.txt
tail (View the Last Few Lines of a File):

Displays the last 10 lines of a file by default. Useful for monitoring log files.
Example:

tail file.txt
To continuously view updates to a file (useful for logs):
tail -f logfile.log

Permissions and Ownership
Linux uses a permission model to control who can read, write, and execute files and directories. Every file has an owner and a group associated with it, and permissions for the owner, group, and others.

File Permissions Format:

Permissions are displayed as a string of 10 characters (e.g., -rwxr-xr--):
The first character indicates whether it’s a directory (d) or a file (-).
The next three characters represent owner permissions (r = read, w = write, x = execute).
The next three represent group permissions.
The last three represent others permissions.
chmod (Change File Permissions):

chmod is used to change the read (r), write (w), and execute (x) permissions of a file.
Examples:

Grant read, write, and execute permissions to the file owner, read and execute permissions to the group, and no permissions to others:
chmod 750 file.txt
Breakdown of 750:

7 (owner) = read (4) + write (2) + execute (1) = 7

5 (group) = read (4) + execute (1) = 5

0 (others) = no permissions

To give all users (owner, group, and others) read and write permissions:

chmod 666 file.txt
chown (Change File Ownership):

chown changes the owner of a file or directory.
Example:

To change the owner of a file to user john:
chown john file.txt
To change both the owner and group:
chown john:admin file.txt
chgrp (Change Group Ownership):

chgrp changes the group ownership of a file or directory.
Example:

chgrp admin file.txt


Examples
1. Create a Directory in RedHat and Ubuntu
Create a directory:
mkdir my_directory
Create a nested directory structure:
mkdir -p parent_directory/child_directory
2. Create, Edit, and Delete Files Using nano and vi in RedHat and Ubuntu
Create a file using nano:

nano newfile.txt
Add some text, then save with Ctrl + O and exit with Ctrl + X.
Create a file using vi:

vi newfile.txt
Press i to enter insert mode, type some text, then press Esc to return to command mode.
Save and exit with :wq.
Delete the file:

rm newfile.txt
3. Change File Permissions Using chmod

1. Give the owner read, write, and execute permissions, the group read and execute permissions, and others no permissions:

chmod 750 script.sh
Allow everyone to read and write a file:
chmod 666 document.txt
